At Psalm 68 verse 5, Jehovah is called a father of the fatherless.
Are you a fatherless child?
Or do you have a fatherless child or fatherless children in your congregation?
You may be wondering what do we mean by fatherless child?
Well, in the context of our discussion, we're talking about young people who have only
one believing parent, one parent in the truth.
Now that allows for a spectrum of possibilities.
It could be a single parent family.
It could be a religiously divided family, and especially when the unbeliever is opposed.
It could even include a situation where only one parent is actively serving Jehovah.
I was five years old when my mother learned the truth from the Bible.
For some years I lived in a religiously divided home, and eventually my mother became a single
parent, and we dealt with those circumstances.
There are many of us here at Bethel, in the field pioneering, serving as missionary,
circuit overseers, construction workers, many of us who experienced similar circumstances.
Interestingly in the Bible, Jehovah saw fit to include the life experience of a young
man who grew up in a religiously divided home.
Timothy.
The Bible describes him as having a believing Jewish mother, but a Greek father.
He had only one parent who served Jehovah.
Now we know that his mother Eunus and his grandmother Lojas were instrumental in helping
him become well-founded in the truth.
But the scriptures indicate others had a share in his spiritual advancement as well.
And that's where all of us come into this conversation.
All of us like Jehovah need to appreciate the fatherless children and our congregations.
We should view them as modern-day Timothy's.
How do we do that?
Well we can learn a lot from the Apostle Paul.
Late in the year 49 or early 50 CE, the Apostle Paul on his second missionary journey visited
the city of Listera, and there he observed Timothy.
Not just in a casual way, Paul really saw Timothy.
He observed his potential and he took the initiative to provide training so that Timothy
could realize that potential.
That's a beautiful example for us.
We need to take note of and encourage the fatherless children in our midst.
The Apostle Paul set a nice example in something that he wrote to Timothy.
In the year 65 CE, Paul was a prisoner in Rome with no prospect of being released.
In fact, his death was imminent.
Come to write one more letter, to whom did he write?
To Timothy, his beloved child in the faith.
And what did he have to say to Timothy in this last inspired letter?
Let's read it together.
Second Timothy, chapter 1, 2 Timothy, chapter 1 verse 5.
For I recall your unhypocritical faith, which dwelled first in your grandmother Loas
and your mother Unas, but which I am confident is also in you.
Did you notice what Paul did?
In just a few words, he commended and expressed confidence in Timothy.
But he also commended Timothy's mother and grandmother, didn't he?
For their unhypocritical faith.
For Loas and Unas, serving Jehovah was not playhacking, their faith was genuine.
What a blessing for Timothy that proved to be.
Well, in a similar way, we can offer specific, sincere heartfelt commendation to fatherless
children and their parents and commend them for what they're able to do, include them
in spiritual and recreational activities.
When I was a boy, my grandmother used to pick me up every Saturday morning and take me
in the ministry.
I never had to wonder if she was coming, and I never had to wonder who I would work with.
The book study conductor, an older brother, would always include my grandmother and me in
the group with him and his wife.
I cherish those memories.
Pay close attention now, as some who grew up in single-parent homes explained how they
were encouraged to be successful fighters for the faith.
It felt like a bad dream.
Our family were really zealous in the truth.
We were playing downstairs one day, and Mum came down to tell us she was leaving Jehovah
and leaving Dad, saying goodbye to Mum, that was the hardest day of my life.
My mother and father became inactive when I was about four years old.
My father was never really around.
When my Mum started to learn the truth, my Dad said she was forbidden from studying.
If we were to go to the meetings, he would take us out forcibly.
He became verbally and physically abusive to my Mum.
My parents' breakup was very tough.
It was a struggle for my Mum to raise two boys on her own.
She would work two or three jobs, and serving Jehovah just took a back seat.
When my parents divorced, my Mum was very depressed.
She did the best she could, but Jehovah did an intent for mothers to fill both roles
as parents.
My sisters and I, we made a conscious choice that we weren't going to make the same
bad choices that Mum did.
We realised that it's up to us, so I dedicated my life to Jehovah and was baptized when
I was 15.
We thrived spiritually when we didn't have the opposition from Dad.
Now we can go out and service, go to the meetings freely.
We didn't have to hide our literature for fear he would rip them up.
When I was around 15 years old, my Mum took us to the meeting, and she was determined
that this was going to be her last meeting.
It was the night of a local needs party.
It was the right time Jehovah just opened my Mum's heart, why?
After that experience, it was like she was a new woman.
My sisters and I have always been a team.
We pioneered together, we moved to Cambodia to serve as negrators together.
They're both in special full-time service with their husbands in Cambodia, and I've been
serving here in Myanmar Bethel along with my husband for just over 11 years now.
My Mum set a stellar example for me to follow.
Her relationship with Jehovah was always above everything else.
It was her example that helped me to set and reach spiritual goals.
I started pioneering during my senior year of high school, in nearly 20 years of full-time
service, spending most of that time at Brooklyn Bethel and Warwick with my wife.
My Mum had a very strong influence on theocratic goals.
My wife and I had the privilege of attending the first school, the Kingdom Evangelisers,
and currently we're serving in the circuit work.
No one needs to be defined by their negative circumstances.
First Peter 5-10 says, God Himself will complete your training.
It might be tough at times, but what Jehovah's help you can succeed.
It reminds me of what David said in the 27th Psalm in verse 10.
He said, even if my father or mother abandoned me, Jehovah would take me in.
That was definitely the case in my situation.
Jehovah doesn't define us by our upbringing or our past.
He sees our potential, so it's up to us.
With Jehovah we can be anything we want to be.
Well we appreciate those beautiful expressions.
So those of you who are fatherless children.
How do you see yourself?
Do you see yourself as Jehovah sees you?
As a unique individual with potential?
Certainly you're not inferior in any way because of your circumstance.
Did you appreciate the comments made by those in the video?
Your circumstances don't have to define you.
We would add this, your unique experience in life gives you a unique perspective and
Jehovah may be able to use you to help others.
So be a Timothy.
At a young age, relatively speaking, Timothy was a spiritual man entrusted with responsibility.
The Apostle Paul described him as having a disposition like no one else's.
Timothy cared for others.
You can do the same.
Reach out.
Be a pioneer, a Bethelite, a field missionary, a construction worker, a circuit overseer.
You young brothers qualify and reach out to be a ministerial servant and then an elder.
The opportunities are endless.
Allow Jehovah to use you.
And continue to cultivate appreciation for your loyal parent.
I know I appreciate my mother very much for her fine example of faith through a number
of very trying circumstances.
We don't take the faithfulness of our single parents for granted.
Well, in conclusion, we want to assure you that you can be a successful fighter for the
faith, just as Timothy was.
We have confidence in you and we pray Jehovah's continued rich blessing on your service
to him.
Father Joel Dalinger, a helper to the service committee, will consider the final talk of
this symposium.
Successful fighters for the faith, single Christians.